All right. Let's get talking
about virtualization.
Virtualization is when things get
really interesting
on the mainframe.
So you've got this machine
that is physically very big,
the goal is always to make
them smaller and smaller.
But the mainframe
actually does have
a ton of processors, memory,
and I/O in it, and it's got
all the cooling and the power
and the network required
to make it run.
So it's big, but that's
a physical description.
Again, we're trying to
draw this distinction
between physical and logical.
So you've got the mainframe,
you got this big
empty logical area.
We've defined
all the physical stuff.
You've got all these
processors, the storage,
the I/O adapter but not
formed into anything yet.
So you start grabbing a
couple of these processors
a little bit of memory,
some connectivity,
couple of I/O adapters,
and you start squishing them
all together and you say,
"Okay, this is
a new system right here.
I've built a new system out
of these physical components,
I build a logical system here."
For all intents and purposes it
is a computer, you
can start it up,
you can shut it down,
it runs an operating system,
it has a display,
or it's a virtual
display you have to
use some software to
look at it but it's
a computer and we call that a
logical partition or an LPAR.
So building an LPAR
it's a lot like
having this big plastic tub
of building blocks.
It's nothing built specifically
we got all these resources here.
So you can grab
some pieces and you start
sticking them together
and look, I made a boat.
I take some more over
here start putting them
together and I've made a house,
I can make a car, I can keep on
going until I've run
out of resources.
So I do the same thing with
physical resources on a
mainframe to build these LPAR's.
Say I've got 16 LPAR's,
all built on
my mainframe and some of
them are really big
with a bunch of
processors and memory
and I/O and some of
them are really small enough
just to run a basic program.
Some have a ton of processors
but not a lot of memory,
some have very few processors
but a ton of I/O adapters.
You can build them like that,
that's flexibility
behind virtualization.
Physically, the
mainframe looks the
same before and after
you've done all that.
it's just sits there and does
its job, it's a mainframe.
But logically, you've
created 16 new systems.
If you told somebody, "Hey,
check out my system, log
into the system I created".
They wouldn't have any way
of knowing that it's
an LPAR sitting next
to a whole bunch of
other systems within
one big physical system
because it's it's own computer,
it's its own system.
You've got one big
physical mainframe
and 16 logical servers.
I do want to talk a little bit
more about resources
on the mainframe,
particularly, the processors.
There are a whole bunch of
processor units, processors,
and a processor can behave in
a couple different ways
depending on how its configured.
It can be a processor just
like the one in
a desktop computer or
a laptop where it runs
the operating system and
helps with applications,
and that's called a CP
or Central Processor.
You can also have a System
Assist Processor SAP or SAP.
An SAP helps link between
the CP and the I/O.
So instead of
the main processor having
to worry about shuffling data
back and forth and saying,
oh, take this byte over
here and move it over here.
The SAP processor
handles all that stuff,
it speeds things up tremendously.
It lets the CP focus on
the business application
that's running
not on the stuff
in the background.
Then there's the IFL,
the Integrated
Facility for Linux,
which is a processor specifically
for running Linux
on the mainframe.
Now, you can run Linux on
a CP processor or
general purpose on,
but the IFL has special
licensing associated with it.
So it's more cost effective
for running Linux.
Then lastly there's
ZIIP processors,
that's Z-I-I-P. For
certain workloads,
you can use the ZIIP processors
to offload work to them,
stuff like Java runs on ZIIP's.
Again, the purpose is to, one,
let the main processor
off-load their work and two,
enable them more cost
effective option for
workloads where it might be
hard to predict or contain them.
I mentioned earlier
the I/O adapters.
Now the mainframe has
a lot of I/O adapters,
each one of those wires
you're seeing in
this picture right
here goes up to
an I/O adapter and
there's even more
on the back and even
more on the other frame.
On the other end,
those are connected
to disk storage devices,
network adapters, network
attached storage,
other mainframes, you name it.
We identify these I/O adapters as
Channel Path
Identifiers or CHPIDS.
The CHPID is associated with
a physical port location
also called a PCHID
for the Physical Channel ID and a
logical subsystem that
it's associated with.
A subsystem is the connection
between the LPAR and
the I/O devices or other
LPAR's that it needs to
communicate directly with.
You can put everything into
one big subsystem or you can
create a few logical
subsystems within it.
So the CHPID which
is the association
between the physical port
location and the subsystem,
you can think about it just
like being a line between the
two can be dedicated
fully to one LPAR,
meaning it has
full control of it or
it can be shared between
multiple LPAR's,
it can also be unshared
and reconfigurable,
meaning that it can be switched
from LPAR to another but
only one at a time since
it's a logical connection.
Lastly, a CHPID can also
be configured as spanned,
which means that it's
actually associated with
partitions from
multiple logical subsystems.
Lastly, a CHPID can also
be configured as span,
which means that it's actually
accessed from partitions,
from multiple logical
channels subsystems.
One last word about virtualization
that we're going to
take a very logical
and physical break.
In addition to hosting
operating systems within LPAR's,
there's an operating system
that specializes in
virtualization called
z/VM or Virtual Machine.
Z/VM is a type one hypervisor,
meaning that it doesn't
need to sit on top of
another operating system
in order to do
its thing and within z/VM,
you can create hundreds,
thousands of virtual machines.
They all share the resources
that the host z/VM system has.
Into the mainframe, it thinks is
just hosting one big
operating system,
but within it, you can run
any number of operating systems.
Anything that runs on
the mainframe runs
under z/VM including
another z/VM.
So that's virtually
everything I have to
tell you about virtualization
on the mainframe.